Welcome back.
In this video on a cover the topic of state and especially the idea of state updates being asynchronous.
Let's have a look.
I've just started a base create reactive project for us and the only thing I've done up until now is
just up there is this from a function to a class component.
Now what I want to do is just simply change this attack to a button and we'll do the same over here
and we don't need any of this.
All we need is while let's just say here update state so that we have an update state ban.
And then finally we'll create some sort of state that will display here and let's just say that we want
to create again using constructor I'm going to call super.
As we always do.
And then finally we'll say this state is going to equal and let's just say.
Meaning of Life is going to be while 47.
And make sure I have the proper syntax and all we're going to do is just display this state up here
as this dot state.
Dot meaning of life.
So if we save this and we run our server we should have the meaning of light meaning of life.
But we also want to update the state so again and this button will just create and this is something
we've already seen before right.
So this should become second nature to us by now.
So we create a non click we'll say it's going to be this dot handle click and we're create this method
on this component right here we'll say handle click we'll use an arrow function so that we don't have
that issue with this keyword.
And then in here we'll simply say this dot set state to update our meaning of life.
Well let's just incremented by 1.
So what I'm going to do is say.
Meaning of Life is going to equal this dot state DOT meaning of life plus 1.
That's it.
So if I save this and go back and I click on update state I see that my state is updated every time
I click.
Now here's the thing as I've mentioned before the react library helps us manipulate the dumb but to
be efficient and to be fast it usually batches multiple sets state calls because sometimes we can have
in our app multiple set state calls so or multiple locations where we change the damn instead of calling
set state every single time.
It sometimes gets smart and says oh don't worry if there's a lot of states happening I'll bash them
together and update them all into one single update for performance now in our case.
This worked.
But react actually does not guarantee that when we call this and we update state that this is going
to work why is that.
Well because this call offsets state is asynchronous and what does that mean.
It means that when we click on the button this doesn't happen immediately when we call this sad state.
We give control to the reactive library and we say hey you take care of this you know the best time
to update the state for me.
I don't care just do it for me and I'll keep doing something else so unlike a synchronous call that
this happens immediately when we call it asynchronous it just happens sometime in the future and we
actually saw this when you mentioned the fact that if we ever wanted to check the state let's say after
we make this call let's say we do a console dialog this dot state DOT.
Meaning of Life if we did this.
We'll notice that this state of meaning of life won't get updated even though it's called after the
set state again if I save and go back and open up the developer tools you'll see here that when I click
this my state is 48 but it console logged 47 and it's always 1 behind and that is because this line
runs we give control to react to update the state for us but it doesn't do it immediately does it asynchronously.
And by the time we call this line the state had it hasn't been updated and we saw a way to get around
this right.
We can give a second parameter to our set state call which is our callback and the callback simply takes
a function so it can just have a simple IRA function here that console logs for us.
So if I move this here now and I save go back and I click you see that now everything is in sync Okay
so that works.
But here's the thing.
This is actually that practice.
Why is that.
Well because our app is simple right now.
This is working however because of the way.
Set state batches work into a single update like I mentioned.
If we had multiple set state calls it doesn't guarantee that when we increment meaning of life that
this part meaning of life will be the latest version.
Maybe another part of the app modifies meaningful life to be something else.
So because there is no guarantee there's a rule and react that we have to follow and the rule is this.
If in your set state call you ever use this dot state directly like this.
So instead of meaning of life being something that while let's say dolphins where we don't use the state
that's completely fine and we can just give it an object but if we ever want to use this dot state or
this dot props in our updates to calculate something then we should do something instead of what we
do here which is giving it an object.
So let's just remove all of this or we can keep the callback function over here because this could just
stay there.
The important part is the first parameter this object instead of an object can also be a function and
it's a function that receives two things.
One is the state or to be more descriptive.
The previous state and then the second parameter is the previous props so if I just wrap this in brackets
since these are the parameters and we call this function and in here I do the exact same thing where
we return an object so I'm adding the brackets here so that I don't have to just type in return so that
we can actually return the object here if I do this I can say.
Meaning of Life and say this dot state DOT.
Meaning of Life plus 1.
Just like that.
Let's put this on a new line just so it's cleaner.
So I'll remove the brackets here and I'll simply say return the object.
Meaning of Life just like this so this whole function is our first parameter and our second parameter
is right here so if I do this I now can use this previous state to guarantee that when I update this
this is the latest previous state before the update.
So this is just best practice that you have to remember anytime you want to update state and there's
props or state that you need to use within the update.
Then you should use the syntax of using a function instead of an object.
So in here instead of calling this dot state directly I simply just say previous state.
So if I save this and go back and I click update you see that everything is still working properly.
Awesome
now all about this previous props in order for us to play with this.
We need to have some sort of props or properties on this app component but up until now we've only seen
app b the parent or the biggest higher level component.
It's the top of the tree but as I mentioned previously states can live anywhere.
We don't need to have state and just one component.
We can bring it down the tree to another node.
We can mix and match and that's something we'll explore throughout the course.
But let me show you how we can get props to the app component.
We simply go to index J.S. where the app component is and lets say we'll add a increment attribute and
this increment attribute will be well while we increment by.
Now if I do hear one this is going to give me an error it's going to say well I'm trying to do J.S.
sex and I have no idea what this means because remember we need to pass it some sort of a value in JavaScript
which means wrapping it in brackets so this evaluates to a Jaffa script expression.
If I save this I now have these props now let's say I wanted to use the props here.
So now I'm going to get the increment prop so I'll just say this dot props dot
if I see this all right.
It seems to be working but let's check fi update state all right.
This is working nicely.
Perfect and again if I wanted to just use previous props I can just make sure that it's the latest and
nothing has changed it by using previous props.
If I save it once again everything is working great.
Now one last thing.
Usually it's good practice to put in here in the constructor and super to put in the props like this.
Now what does this do.
This allows you to actually use the props in the constructor.
What do we mean if I do here this dot props I can now use this dot props inside of the constructor.
So if you ever need to use this stop props inside of the constructor you need to pass this year.
So for example if I just simply do this dot props equals props I save it and I remove the props from
here.
You'll notice that I'll get an error props is not defined because I can I use this stop props this way.
Now there are occasions when that needs to happen.
So it's always recommended that you just add props in case you ever need to do this stop props in here
so let's say for example in our state calculation we want to say that meaning of life is going to equal
47 plus this stop prop start increment so I'll originally be 48 if we safe here we have previous props
here for the increment if I go back you see that it's now 48 as the default so that the next update
will be forty nine.
So this is why we passed props in the constructor and super.
Now the final thing I want to show you is that create react app has something called the alternate class
syntax.
Now in regular javascript you can do this and there are proposals that are going to allow future versions
of javascript to do this but you may see them in common react code basis.
So I want to show you because some people don't like this constructor having so many lines of code.
Sometimes a state is just a simple thing.
So for example if we didn't have any of this increment and we just had the plus one here let's say no
props.
Well we can just remove all of this like so and just simply say that state is equal meaning of life
which equals forty seven and that's it and if I do this it leaves out the constructor and initialize
as the state as a class field declaration.
Again this is something because of the Create we act up Andy Babel compiler that it has underneath but
you are going to see this in some code bases where you just want to set state really easily but you
won't have access to the props inside of here as we did with the constructor so that if I say this this
should still work and it does keep in mind state updates are a synchronous and we want to be careful.
The rule is this.
Do you ever want to manipulate or use this state somehow after the update.
Then add in a second parameter which will be a function where you can use that updated state maybe in
your update and in your state update you have to use the state as part of that calculation or the props
as part of the calculation then you should pass this function form to update the state.
Otherwise you can just use the simple object notation that we've seen up until now if you get this concept
this is going to take you very far in your career so hope that makes sense and I'll see you in the next
video.